---
title: "Of the Satisfaction of Christ"
date: 2024-03-12T09:49:03+10:00
layout: post
categories: ["Owen-Devotions"]
description: John Owen
thumbnail: "https://source.unsplash.com/YmQ0-nmWcV0/640x360"
image: "http://digitalpuritan.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/johnbunyana.jpeg"
---
The last matter to be examined, concerning the recent opposition to the foundational truths of the gospel, is the doctrine of Christ's satisfaction. I believe this doctrine needs more of an explanation than a defense. It is the central point where most, if not all, the promises and commands of the gospel converge, and the primary means of our communion with God in faith and obedience. It is the great distinction between the Christian religion and all others in the world. It will easily be agreed upon by all who desire to be considered disciples of Jesus Christ, when properly presented. Those with sound minds will judge whether a collection of insipid objections can be considered enough to erase the revelation of this doctrine.

"We do not dispute about the term 'satisfaction.' It properly expresses the great effect of Christ's death, which we advocate for in this matter. However, because it is more a part of explaining the truth we contend for than expressly used in revealing it, and because understanding the word itself depends on legal notions that we do not need to consider yet, I will not insist on it at this point in our discussion. I will leave it as the natural conclusion of what we will find expressly declared in Scripture. I do not say this because I am avoiding the word or its proper use or what it properly signifies, but I am placing it in its proper context, in line with our method and purpose in this brief discourse.

I am aware that some have taken a new approach to expressing and explaining the doctrine of Christ's mediation, along with the causes and ends of his death, which they consider more rational than what is usually emphasized. However, from what I have heard or seen of this approach, it has been not only unscriptural but also very irrational and far from the accuracy claimed by its proponents. If they were to publish their ideas, it is likely that they would face scholarly scrutiny.

Our current task, as has been stated before, is to establish the faith of those who may be tempted or endangered by the cunning of some who seek to deceive, and the allurements of others who openly pursue the same goal. Therefore, we are investigating what Scripture plainly and clearly reveals on this matter. As we do so, we will address and counter any fallacies that have been attempted against the sacred truth now under consideration.

The essence of what Scripture reveals about this great truth, commonly known as the 'satisfaction of Christ,' can be summarized in the following points:

First, Adam, who was created upright, sinned against God, and all mankind, his descendants, sinned in him: Genesis 1:27, 'So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them.' Genesis 3:11, 'And he said, "Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten of the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?"' Ecclesiastes 7:29, 'See, this alone I found, that God made man upright, but they have sought out many schemes.' Romans 5:12, 'Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned.' Romans 5:18, 'Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men.' Romans 5:19, 'For as by the one man’s disobedience the many were made sinners.'

"Secondly, because of this sin of our first parents, all people are brought into a state of sin and rebellion against God, and are enemies of him: Genesis 6:5, 'The LORD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every intention of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.' Psalm 51:5, 'Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.' Romans 3:23, 'For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.' Romans 8:7, 'For the mind that is set on the flesh is hostile to God, for it does not submit to God's law; indeed, it cannot.' Ephesians 4:18, 'They are darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them, due to their hardness of heart.' Ephesians 2:1; Colossians 2:13.

Thirdly, in this state, all people continue to sin against God, and by themselves cannot do otherwise: Romans 3:10–12, 'as it is written: “None is righteous, no, not one; no one understands; no one seeks for God. All have turned aside; together they have become worthless; no one does good, not even one.”'

Fourthly, the justice and holiness of God, as the supreme ruler and judge of all the world, require that sin be punished: Exodus 34:7, 'keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children and the children's children, to the third and the fourth generation.”' Joshua 24:19, 'But Joshua said to the people, “You are not able to serve the LORD, for he is a holy God. He is a jealous God; he will not forgive your transgressions or your sins.' Psalm 5:4–6, 'For you are not a God who delights in wickedness; evil may not dwell with you. The boastful shall not stand before your eyes; you hate all evildoers. You destroy those who speak lies; the LORD abhors the bloodthirsty and deceitful man.' Habakkuk 1:13, 'You who are of purer eyes than to see evil and cannot look at wrong, why do you idly look at traitors and remain silent when the wicked swallows up the man more righteous than he?' Isaiah 33:14, 'The sinners in Zion are afraid; trembling has seized the godless: “Who among us can dwell with the consuming fire? Who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?”' Romans 1:32, 'Though they know God's righteous decree that those who practice such things deserve to die, they not only do them but give approval to those who practice them.' Romans 3:5-6, 'But if our unrighteousness serves to show the righteousness of God, what shall we say? That God is unrighteous to inflict wrath on us? (I speak in a human way.) By no means! For then how could God judge the world?' 2 Thessalonians 1:6, 'since indeed God considers it just to repay with affliction those who afflict you,' Hebrews 12:29, 'for our God is a consuming fire.' (quoting Deuteronomy 4:24)

Fifthly, God has also committed his truthfulness and faithfulness to uphold the law, promising not to leave sin unpunished: Genesis 2:17, 'but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die.' Deuteronomy 27:26, "'Cursed be anyone who does not confirm the words of this law by doing them.' And all the people shall say, 'Amen.'” If mankind had been left without divine aid and help in this state and condition, they would have perished eternally."

"Sixthly, out of his infinite goodness, grace, and love for humanity, God sent his only Son to save and deliver them from this condition: Matthew 1:21, 'She will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.' John 3:16-17, 'For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him.' Romans 5:8, 'but God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.' 1 John 4:9, 'In this the love of God was made manifest among us, that God sent his only Son into the world, so that we might live through him.' Verse 10, 'In this is love, not that we have loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.' 1 Thessalonians 1:10, 'and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus who delivers us from the wrath to come.'

Seventhly, this love was the same in the Father and the Son, acting distinctly as will be explained later. Therefore, the arguments of those who, from the Father's love in this matter, would argue against the Son's love, or vice versa, are in vain.

Eighthly, the general way in which the Son of God, being incarnate, was to save lost sinners, was by substituting himself, according to God's design and appointment, in the place of those he was to save: 2 Corinthians 5:21, 'For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.' Galatians 3:13, 'Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us.' Romans 5:7-8, 'For one will scarcely die for a righteous person—though perhaps for a good person one would dare even to die—but God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.' Romans 8:3, 'For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do. By sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh.' 1 Peter 2:24, 'He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, that we might die to sin and live to righteousness. By his wounds you have been healed.' 1 Peter 3:18, 'For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God.' All these expressions clearly indicate a substitution of Christ in suffering in place of those he was to save. This is what we mean by his satisfaction — that he was made 'sin for us,' 'a curse for us,' 'died for us,' that is, in our place, so that we might be saved from the wrath to come. The true meaning of all these expressions will be defended as needed."

"Ninthly, the way in which he saves sinners is specifically expressed in several ways in the Scriptures:

1. He offered himself as a sacrifice to God to make atonement for our sins, through his death and suffering: Isaiah 53:10, 'Yet it was the LORD's will to crush him and cause him to suffer, and though the LORD makes his life an offering for sin.' John 1:29, 'The next day John saw Jesus coming toward him and said, “Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!' Ephesians 5:2, 'and walk in the way of love, just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.' Hebrews 2:17, 'For this reason he had to be made like them, fully human in every way, in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God, and that he might make atonement for the sins of the people.' Hebrews 9:11-14, 'But when Christ came as high priest of the good things that are now already here, he went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle that is not made with human hands, that is to say, is not a part of this creation. He did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the Most Holy Place once for all by his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption. The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean. How much more, then, will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living God!'

2. He redeemed us by paying a price, a ransom, for our redemption: Mark 10:45, 'For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.' 1 Corinthians 6:20, 'you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your bodies.' 1 Timothy 2:6, 'who gave himself as a ransom for all people. This has now been witnessed to at the proper time.' Titus 2:14, 'who gave himself for us to redeem us from all wickedness and to purify for himself a people that are his very own, eager to do what is good.' 1 Peter 1:18-19, 'For you know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you from your ancestors, but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or defect.'

3. He bore our sins, or the punishment due to them: Isaiah 53:5-6, 'But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was on him, and by his wounds we are healed. We all, like sheep, have gone astray, each of us has turned to our own way; and the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all.' 1 Peter 2:24, 'He himself bore our sins' in his body on the cross, so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness; 'by his wounds you have been healed.'

4. He fulfilled the law and its penalty: Romans 8:3-4, 'For what the law was powerless to do because it was weakened by the flesh, God did by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh to be a sin offering. And so he condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fully met in us, who do not live according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.' Galatians 3:13, 'Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us.' Galatians 4:4-5, 'But when the set time had fully come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, to redeem those under the law, that we might receive adoption to sonship.'

5. He died for sin and sinners, to atone for the former and in place of the latter: Romans 4:25, 'He was delivered over to death for our sins and was raised to life for our justification.' Romans 5:10, 'For if, while we were God's enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son, how much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved through his life!' 1 Corinthians 15:3, 'For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures.' 2 Corinthians 5:14, 'For Christ's love compels us, because we are convinced that one died for all, and therefore all died.' 1 Thessalonians 5:9-10, 'For God did not appoint us to suffer wrath but to receive salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. He died for us so that, whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with him.'

6. Therefore, on God's part, it is affirmed that 'he did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all,' Romans 8:32, and 'the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all,' Isaiah 53:6."

Seventhly, the effect of this was:

1. The righteousness of God was glorified. Romans 3:25-26, 'God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement, through the shedding of his blood—to be received by faith. He did this to demonstrate his righteousness, because in his forbearance he had left the sins committed beforehand unpunished— he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in Jesus.' 2. The law was fulfilled and satisfied, as previously quoted in Romans 8:3-4; Galatians 3:13, 4:4-5. 3. God was reconciled. 2 Corinthians 5:18-19, 'All this is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation: that God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting people's sins against them.' Hebrews 2:17, 'For this reason he had to be made like them, fully human in every way, in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God, and that he might make atonement for the sins of the people.' 4. Atonement was made for sin. Romans 5:11, 'Not only is this so, but we also boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.' Peace was made with God. Ephesians 2:14, 16, 'For he himself is our peace, who has made the two groups one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility.' 5. He made an end of sin. Daniel 9:24, 'Seventy ‘sevens’ are decreed for your people and your holy city to finish transgression, to put an end to sin, to atone for wickedness, to bring in everlasting righteousness.' The glory of God in all these things being exalted, himself was well pleased, righteousness and everlasting redemption, or salvation, purchased for sinners. Hebrews 9:14, 'How much more, then, will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living God!'

I have chosen these specifics to provide an example to every ordinary reader of how fully and plainly what he is to believe in this matter is revealed in the Scripture. And if I were to present all the testimonies that expressly give witness to these positions, it is known how much of the Bible would need to be transcribed. These are the things that are indispensably required of us to believe, so that we may be able to direct and regulate our obedience according to the mind and will of God. In the explanation of this doctrine for further edification, several things are usually emphasized, which necessarily and infallibly follow from the propositions of Scripture laid down before, and serve to instill in the minds of believers a proper understanding of them:

1. God is to be considered as the chief, supreme, absolute ruler and governor of all—as the Lord of the law and of sinners, but as an offended ruler, not as an offended person. He has the right to exact punishment for transgressions, and his righteousness of rule requires that he should do so.
2. Because he is righteous and holy, as the supreme Judge of all the world, it is necessary that he do right in punishing sin; without which the order of creation cannot be preserved. For sin is the creature's deviation of itself from the order of its dependence on and obedience to the Creator and supreme Lord of all, and without the punishment of sin, confusion would be brought into the whole creation.
3. The law and its penalty are the moral or declarative cause of the punishment of sin, and it directly obliges the sinner himself to punishment. God, as the supreme ruler, does not dispense with the act of the law, but with the immediate object, and substitutes another sufferer in the place of those who are primarily liable to the sentence of it and are now to be acquitted or freed, so that the law may be satisfied, justice exalted, and yet the sinner saved.
4. The person thus substituted was the Son of God incarnate, who had the power to dispose of himself, with the will and readiness for it, and who, on account of the dignity of his person, was able to answer the penalty that all others had incurred and deserved.
5. God, upon his voluntary assumption of this office and condescension to this work, laid our sins, by the sentence of the law, upon him, making full satisfaction for whatever could legally be charged to those for whom he died or suffered.
6. The specific way, terms, and conditions by which sinners may be interested in this satisfaction made by Christ are determined by the will of God and declared in the Scripture.

These and similar things are usually emphasized in the explanation or declaration of this aspect of our confession, and there is nothing asserted in them that is not excellently suited to the common notions that mankind has of God and his righteousness, and that does

 not answer the light of nature and common reason, as exemplified in various instances among the nations of the world.

I shall therefore take one argument from some of the testimonies previously produced in confirmation of this sacred truth, and proceed to address the objections commonly raised against it."

"If the Lord Christ, according to the will of the Father and by his own counsel and choice, was substituted, and did substitute himself, as the mediator of the covenant, in the room and in the stead of sinners, so that they might be saved, and therein bore their sins or the punishment due unto their sins by undergoing the curse and penalty of the law, and therein also, according to the will of God, offered up himself for a propitiatory, expiatory sacrifice, to make atonement for sin and reconciliation for sinners, so that the justice of God being appeased and the law fulfilled, they might go free or be delivered from the wrath to come; and if thereby, he also paid a real satisfactory price for their redemption, then he made satisfaction to God for sin, for these are the things that we intend by that expression of satisfaction. Now, all these things are openly and fully witnessed in the testimonies before produced, as may be observed by suiting some of them to the several particulars here asserted:

1. What was done in this matter was from the will, purpose, and love of God the Father. Psalm 40:6–8; Hebrews 10:5–7; Acts 4:28; John 3:16; Romans 8:3.
2. It was also done by his own voluntary consent. Philippians 2:6–8.
3. He was substituted, and did substitute himself, as the mediator of the covenant, in the room and stead of sinners, so that they may be saved. Hebrews 10:5–7, 7:22; Romans 3:25–26, 5:7–8.
4. He did bear their sins or the punishment due to their sins. Isaiah 53:6, 11; 1 Peter 2:24. And this,
5. By undergoing the curse and penalty of the law. Galatians 3:13; or the punishment of sin required by the law. 2 Corinthians 5:21; Romans 8:3.
6. Herein also, according to the will of God, he offered up himself a propitiatory and expiatory sacrifice, to make atonement for sin and reconciliation for sinners. Ephesians 5:2; Romans 5:6; Hebrews 9:11–14; — which he did so that the justice of God being satisfied and the law fulfilled, sinners might be freed from the wrath to come. Romans 3:25; 1 Thessalonians 1:10.
7. And hereby also he paid a real price of redemption for sin and sinners. 1 Peter 1:18–19; 1 Corinthians 6:20. These are the things that we are to believe concerning the satisfaction of Christ. And our explanation of this doctrine we are ready to defend when called to do so.

The consideration of the objections which are raised against this great fundamental truth shall close this discourse. And they are of two sorts:—

First, in general, to the whole doctrine, as declared, or to some of the more significant heads or parts of it. Secondly, particular instances in this or that supposal, as consequences of the doctrine asserted. In general, —

First, they say, 'This is contrary to, and inconsistent with, the love, grace, mercy, and goodness of God, which are so celebrated in the Scripture as the principal properties of his nature and acts of his will wherein he will be glorified; — especially contrary to the freedom of forgiveness, which we are encouraged to expect, and commanded to believe.' And this exception they endeavor to confirm by testimonies that the Lord is good and gracious and that he does freely forgive us our sins and trespasses.

Answer:
1. I readily grant that whatever is really contrary to the grace, goodness, and mercy of God, whatever is inconsistent with the free forgiveness of sin, is not to be admitted; for these things are fully revealed in the Scripture and must have a consistency with whatever else is therein revealed of God or his will.
2. As God is good, gracious, and merciful, so also he is holy, righteous, true, and faithful. And these things are no less revealed concerning him than the others, and are no less essential properties of his nature than his goodness and grace. And as they are all essentially the same in him, and considered only under a different habitude or respect, as they are exerted by acts of his will, so it belongs to his infinite wisdom that the effects of them, though diverse, and produced by diverse ways and means, may in no way be contrary to one another, but that mercy be exercised without prejudice to justice or holiness, and justice be preserved entire, without any obstruction to the exercise of mercy.
3. The grace and love of God, as revealed in the Scripture in this matter, consists principally in two things: — (1) In his holy eternal purpose of providing relief for lost sinners. He has done it 'to the praise of the glory of his grace' (Ephesians 1:6). (2) In sending his Son in pursuit of and for the accomplishment of the holy purpose of his will and grace. Herein, the Scripture most eminently celebrates the love, goodness, and kindness of God, as that whereby, in infinite and forever to be adored wisdom and grace, he made a way for the forgiveness of our sins. John 3:16, 'For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.' Romans 3:25, 'God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement, through the shedding of his blood.' Romans 5:8, 'God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.' Titus 3:4; 1 John 4:9-10. Herein consists that ever to be adored love, goodness, grace, mercy, and condescension of God. Add to this, that in the act of causing our iniquities to meet on Christ, wherein he immediately intended the declaration of his justice (Romans 3:25),'not sparing him, in delivering him up to death for us all' (Romans 8:32), there was a blessed harmony in the highest justice and most excellent grace and mercy. This grace, this goodness, this love of God towards mankind, towards sinners, our adversaries in this matter neither know nor understand; and so, indeed, what lies in them, remove the foundation of the whole gospel and of all that faith and obedience which God requires at our hands."

"Forgiveness, or the actual condonation of sinners, the pardon and forgiveness of sins, is free; but yet so as it is everywhere restrained unto a respect unto Christ, unto his death and blood-shedding. Ephesians 1:7, “We have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins.” Ephesians 4:32, “God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.” Romans 3:25-26, “God has set him forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins.” It is absolutely free in respect of all immediate transactions between God and sinners.

(1.) Free on the part of God.

[1.] In the eternal purpose of it, when he might justly have suffered all men to have perished under the guilt of their sins. [2.] Free in the means that he used to effect it, unto his glory. First, In the sending of his Son; and, secondly, In laying the punishment of our sin upon him. Thirdly, In his covenant with him, that it should be accepted on our behalf. Fourthly, In his tender and proposal of it by the gospel unto sinners, to be received without money or without price. Fifthly, In the actual condonation and pardon of them that do believe.

(2.) It is free on the part of the persons that are forgiven; in that, [1.] It is given and granted to them, without any satisfaction made by them for their former transgressions. [2.] Without any merit to purchase or procure it. [3.] Without any penal, satisfactory suffering here, or in a purgatory hereafter. [4.] Without any expectation of future recompense; or that, being pardoned, they should then make or give any satisfaction for what they had done before. And as any of these things would, so nothing else can, impeach the freedom of pardon and forgiveness. Whether, then, we respect the pardoner or the pardoned, pardon is every way free, — namely, on the part of God who forgives, and on the part of sinners that are forgiven.

If God now has, besides all this, provided himself a lamb for a sacrifice; if he has, in infinite wisdom and grace, found out a way thus freely to forgive us our sins, to the praise and glory of his own holiness, righteousness, and severity against sin, as well as to the unspeakable advancement of that grace, goodness, and bounty which he immediately exercises in the pardon of sin; are these men’s eyes evil, because he is good? Will they not be contented to be pardoned, unless they may have it at the rate of despoiling God of his holiness, truth, righteousness, and faithfulness? And as this is certainly done by that way of pardon which these men propose, no reserve in the least being made for the glory of God in those holy properties of his nature which are immediately injured and opposed by sin; so that pardon itself, which they pretend so to magnify, having nothing to influence it but a mere arbitrary act of God’s will, is utterly debased from its own proper worth and excellency. And I shall willingly undertake to manifest that they derogate no less from grace and mercy in pardon, than they do from the righteousness and holiness of God, by the forgiveness which they have feigned; and that in it both of them are perverted and despoiled of all their glory.

But they yet say, “If God can freely pardon sin, why does he not do it without satisfaction? If he cannot, he is weaker and more imperfect than man, who can do so.”

Answer:

1. God cannot do many things that men can do, — not that he is more imperfect than they, but he cannot do them on the account of his perfection. He cannot lie, he cannot deny himself, he cannot change; which men can do, and do every day.

2. To pardon sin without satisfaction, in him who is absolutely holy, righteous, true, and faithful, — the absolute, necessary, supreme Governor of all sinners, — the author of the law, and sanction of it, wherein punishment is threatened and declared, — is to deny himself, and to do what one infinitely perfect cannot do.

3. I ask of these men, why God does not pardon sins freely, without requiring faith, repentance, and obedience in them that are pardoned; yea, as the conditions on which they may be pardoned? For, seeing he is so infinitely good and gracious, cannot he pardon men without prescribing such terms and conditions unto them as he knows that men, and that incomparably the greatest number of them, will never come up unto, and so must of necessity perish for ever? Yea, but they say, “This cannot be: neither does this impeach the freedom of pardon; for it is certain that God does prescribe these

 things, and yet he pardons freely; and it would altogether unbecome the holy God to pardon sinners that continue so to live and die in their sins.” But do not these men see that they have hereby given away their cause which they contend for? For, if a prescription of sundry things to the sinner himself, without which he shall not be pardoned, do not at all impeach, as they say, the freedom of pardon, but God may be said freely to pardon sin notwithstanding it; how shall the receiving of satisfaction by another, nothing at all being required of the sinner, have the least appearance of any such thing? If the freedom of forgiveness consists in such a boundless notion as these men imagine, it is certain that the prescribing of faith and repentance in and unto sinners, antecedently to their participation of it, is much more evidently contrary unto it, than the receiving of satisfaction from another who is not to be pardoned can to any appear to be.

Secondly, if it be contrary to the holiness of God to pardon any without requiring faith, repentance, and obedience in them (as it is indeed), let not these persons be offended if we believe him when he so frequently declares it, that it was so to remit sin, without the fulfilling of his law and satisfaction of his justice.

Secondly, they say, “There is no such thing as justice in God requiring the punishment of sin; but that that which in him requires and calls for the punishment of sin is his anger and wrath; which expressions denote free acts of his will, and not any essential properties of his nature.” So that God may punish sin or not punish it, at his pleasure; therefore there is no reason that he should require any satisfaction for sin, seeing he may pass it by absolutely as he pleases.

Answer:

1. Is it not strange, that the great Governor, the Judge of all the world, which, on the supposition of the creation of it, God is naturally and necessarily, should not also naturally be so righteous as to do right, in rendering unto every one according to his works?

2. The sanction and penalty of the law, which is the rule of punishment, was, I suppose, an effect of justice, — of God’s natural and essential justice, and not of his anger or wrath. Certainly, never did any man make a law for the government of a people in anger. Draco’s laws were not made in wrath, but according to the best apprehension of right and justice that he had, though said to be written in blood; and shall we think otherwise of the law of God?

3. Anger and wrath in God express the effects of justice, and so are not merely free acts of his will. This, therefore, is a tottering cause, that is built on the denial of God’s essential righteousness. But it was proved before, and it is so elsewhere."

"Thirdly, they say, “That the sacrifice of Christ was only metaphorically so,” — that he was a metaphorical priest, not one properly so called; and, therefore, that his sacrifice did not consist in his death and blood-shedding, but in his appearing in heaven upon his ascension, presenting himself unto God in the most holy place not made with hands as the mediator of the new covenant.

Answer:

1. When once these men come to this evasion, they think themselves safe, and that they may go whither they will without control. For they say it is true, Christ was a priest; but only he was a metaphorical one. He offered sacrifice; but it was a metaphorical one. He redeemed us; but with a metaphorical redemption. And so we are justified thereon; but with a metaphorical justification. And so, for aught I know, they are like to be saved with a metaphorical salvation. This is the substance of their plea in this matter:— Christ was not really a priest; but did somewhat like a priest. He offered not sacrifice really; but did somewhat that was like a sacrifice. He redeemed us not really; but did somewhat that looked like redemption. And what these things are, wherein their analogy consists, what proportion the things that Christ has done bear to the things that are really so, from whence they receive their denomination, it is meet it should be wholly in the power of these persons to declare. But, —

2. What should hinder the death of Christ to be a sacrifice, a proper sacrifice, and, according to the nature, end, and use of sacrifices, to have made atonement and satisfaction for sin? (1.) It is expressly called so in the Scripture; wherein he is said to “offer himself, to make his soul an offering, to offer himself a sacrifice,” Ephesians 5:2; Hebrews 1:3, 9:14, 25, 26, 7:27. And he is himself directly said to be a “priest,” or a sacrificer, Hebrews 2:17. And it is nowhere intimated, much less expressed, that these things are not spoken properly, but metaphorically only. (2.) The legal sacrifices of the old law were instituted on purpose to represent and prepare the way for the bringing in of the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, so to take away the sin of the world; and is it not strange, that true and real sacrifices should be types and representations of that which was not so? On this supposition, all those sacrifices are but so many seductions from the right understanding of things between God and sinners. (3.) Nothing is wanting to render it a proper propitiatory sacrifice. For, — [1.] There was the person offering, and that was Christ himself, Hebrews 9:14, “He offered himself unto God.” “He,” that is, the sacrificer, denotes the person of Christ, God and man; and “himself,” as the sacrifice, denotes his human nature whence God is said to “purchase his church with his own blood,” Acts 20:28; for he offered himself through the eternal Spirit: so that, — [2.] There was the matter of the sacrifice, which was the human nature of Christ, soul and body. “His soul was made an offering for sin,” Isaiah 53:10; and his body, “The offering of the body of Jesus Christ,” Hebrews 10:10, — his blood especially, which is often synecdochically mentioned for the whole. (4.) His death had the nature of a sacrifice: for, — [1.] Therein were the sins of men laid upon him, and not in his entrance into heaven; for “he bare our sins in his own body on the tree,” 1 Peter 2:24. God made our sins then “to meet upon him,” Isaiah 53:6; which gives the formality unto any sacrifices. “Quod in ejus caput sit,” is the formal reason of all propitiatory sacrifices, and ever was so, as is expressly declared, Leviticus 16:21, 22; and the phrase of “bearing sin,” of “bearing iniquity,” is constantly used for the undergoing of the punishment due to sin. [2.] It had the end of a proper sacrifice; it made expiation of sin, propitiation and atonement for sin, with reconciliation with God; and so took away that enmity that was between God and sinners, Hebrews 1:3; Romans 3:25, 26; Hebrews 2:17, 18, 5:10; Romans 8:3; 2 Corinthians 5:18, 19. And although God himself designed, appointed, and contrived, in wisdom, this way of reconciliation, as he did the means for the atoning of his own anger towards the friends of Job, commanding them to go unto him, and with him offer sacrifices for themselves, which he would accept, Job 42:7, 8; yet, as he was the supreme Governor, the Lord of all, attended with infinite justice and holiness, atonement was made with him, and satisfaction to him thereby.

What has been spoken may suffice to discover the emptiness and weakness of those exceptions which in general these men make against the truth before laid down from the Scripture. A brief examination of some particular instances, wherein they seek not so much to oppose as to reproach the revelation of this mystery of the gospel, shall put a close to this discourse. It is said, then, —

First, “That if this be so, then it will follow that God is gracious to forgive, and yet [it is] impossible for him, unless the debt be fully satisfied.”

Answer:

1. I suppose the confused and abrupt expression of things here, in words scarcely affording a tolerable sense, is rather from weakness than captiousness; and so I shall let the manner of the proposal pass. 2. What if this should follow, that God is gracious to forgive sinners, and yet will not, cannot, on the account of his own holiness and righteousness, actually forgive any, without satisfaction and atonement made for sin? The worst that can be hence concluded is, that the Scripture is true, which affirms both these in many places. 3. This sets out the exceeding greatness of the grace of God in forgiveness, that when sin could not be forgiven without satisfaction, and the sinner himself could no way make any such satisfaction, he provided himself a sacrifice of atonement, that the sinner might be discharged and pardoned. 4. Sin is not properly a debt, for then it might be paid in kind, by sin itself; but is called so only because it binds over the sinner to punishment, which is the satisfaction to be made for that which is properly a transgression, and improperly only a debt. It is added, —

Secondly, “Hence it follows, that the finite and impotent creature is more capable of extending mercy and forgiveness than the infinite and omnipotent Creator.”

Answer:

1. God being essentially holy and righteous, having engaged his faithfulness in the sanction of the law, and being naturally and necessarily the governor and

 ruler of the world, the forgiving of sin without satisfaction would be no perfection in him, but an effect of impotency and imperfection, — a thing which God cannot do, as he cannot lie, nor deny himself. 2. The direct contrary of what is insinuated is asserted by this doctrine; for, on the supposition of the satisfaction and atonement insisted on, not only does God freely forgive, but that in such a way of righteousness and goodness, as no creature is able to conceive or express the glory and excellency of it. And to speak of the poor having pardons of private men, upon particular offences against themselves, who are commanded so to do, and have no right nor authority to require or exact punishment, nor is any due upon the mere account of their own concernment, in comparison with the forgiveness of God, arises out of a deep ignorance of the whole matter under consideration."

"Thirdly, they say, 'That the sacrifice of Christ was only metaphorically so,' — that he was a metaphorical priest, not one properly so called; and, therefore, that his sacrifice did not consist in his death and blood-shedding, but in his appearing in heaven upon his ascension, presenting himself unto God in the most holy place not made with hands as the mediator of the new covenant.

Answer: 1. When once these men come to this evasion, they think themselves safe, and that they may go whither they will without control. For they say it is true, Christ was a priest; but only he was a metaphorical one. He offered sacrifice; but it was a metaphorical one. He redeemed us; but with a metaphorical redemption. And so we are justified thereon; but with a metaphorical justification. And so, for aught I know, they are like to be saved with a metaphorical salvation. This is the substance of their plea in this matter:— Christ was not really a priest; but did somewhat like a priest. He offered not sacrifice really; but did somewhat that was like a sacrifice. He redeemed us not really; but did somewhat that looked like redemption. And what these things are, wherein their analogy consists, what proportion the things that Christ has done bear to the things that are really so, from whence they receive their denomination, it is meet it should be wholly in the power of these persons to declare. But, —

2. What should hinder the death of Christ to be a sacrifice, a proper sacrifice, and, according to the nature, end, and use of sacrifices, to have made atonement and satisfaction for sin? (1.) It is expressly called so in the Scripture; wherein he is said to 'offer himself, to make his soul an offering, to offer himself a sacrifice,' Ephesians 5:2; Hebrews 1:3, 9:14, 25, 26, 7:27. And he is himself directly said to be a 'priest,' or a sacrificer, Hebrews 2:17. And it is nowhere intimated, much less expressed, that these things are not spoken properly, but metaphorically only. (2.) The legal sacrifices of the old law were instituted on purpose to represent and prepare the way for the bringing in of the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, so to take away the sin of the world; and is it not strange, that true and real sacrifices should be types and representations of that which was not so? On this supposition, all those sacrifices are but so many seductions from the right understanding of things between God and sinners. (3.) Nothing is wanting to render it a proper propitiatory sacrifice. For, — [1.] There was the person offering, and that was Christ himself, Hebrews 9:14, 'He offered himself unto God.' 'He,' that is, the sacrificer, denotes the person of Christ, God and man; and 'himself,' as the sacrifice, denotes his human nature whence God is said to 'purchase his church with his own blood,' Acts 20:28; for he offered himself through the eternal Spirit: so that, — [2.] There was the matter of the sacrifice, which was the human nature of Christ, soul and body. 'His soul was made an offering for sin,' Isaiah 53:10; and his body, 'The offering of the body of Jesus Christ,' Hebrews 10:10, — his blood especially, which is often synecdochically mentioned for the whole. (4.) His death had the nature of a sacrifice: for, — [1.] Therein were the sins of men laid upon him, and not in his entrance into heaven; for 'he bare our sins in his own body on the tree,' 1 Peter 2:24. God made our sins then 'to meet upon him,' Isaiah 53:6; which gives the formality unto any sacrifices. 'Quod in ejus caput sit,' is the formal reason of all propitiatory sacrifices, and ever was so, as is expressly declared, Leviticus 16:21, 22; and the phrase of 'bearing sin,' of 'bearing iniquity,' is constantly used for the undergoing of the punishment due to sin. [2.] It had the end of a proper sacrifice; it made expiation of sin, propitiation and atonement for sin, with reconciliation with God; and so took away that enmity that was between God and sinners, Hebrews 1:3; Romans 3:25, 26; Hebrews 2:17, 18, 5:10; Romans 8:3; 2 Corinthians 5:18, 19. And although God himself designed, appointed, and contrived, in wisdom, this way of reconciliation, as he did the means for the atoning of his own anger towards the friends of Job, commanding them to go unto him, and with him offer sacrifices for themselves, which he would accept, Job 42:7, 8; yet, as he was the supreme Governor, the Lord of all, attended with

 infinite justice and holiness, atonement was made with him, and satisfaction to him thereby.

What has been spoken may suffice to discover the emptiness and weakness of those exceptions which in general these men make against the truth before laid down from the Scripture. A brief examination of some particular instances, wherein they seek not so much to oppose as to reproach the revelation of this mystery of the gospel, shall put a close to this discourse. It is said, then, —

First, 'That if this be so, then it will follow that God is gracious to forgive, and yet [it is] impossible for him, unless the debt be fully satisfied.'

Answer: 1. I suppose the confused and abrupt expression of things here, in words scarcely affording a tolerable sense, is rather from weakness than captiousness; and so I shall let the manner of the proposal pass. 2. What if this should follow, that God is gracious to forgive sinners, and yet will not, cannot, on the account of his own holiness and righteousness, actually forgive any, without satisfaction and atonement made for sin? The worst that can be hence concluded is, that the Scripture is true, which affirms both these in many places. 3. This sets out the exceeding greatness of the grace of God in forgiveness, that when sin could not be forgiven without satisfaction, and the sinner himself could no way make any such satisfaction, he provided himself a sacrifice of atonement, that the sinner might be discharged and pardoned. 4. Sin is not properly a debt, for then it might be paid in kind, by sin itself; but is called so only because it binds over the sinner to punishment, which is the satisfaction to be made for that which is properly a transgression, and improperly only a debt.

It is added, —

Secondly, 'Hence it follows, that the finite and impotent creature is more capable of extending mercy and forgiveness than the infinite and omnipotent Creator.'

Answer: 1. God being essentially holy and righteous, having engaged his faithfulness in the sanction of the law, and being naturally and necessarily the governor and ruler of the world, the forgiving of sin without satisfaction would be no perfection in him, but an effect of impotency and imperfection, — a thing which God cannot do, as he cannot lie, nor deny himself. 2. The direct contrary of what is insinuated is asserted by this doctrine; for, on the supposition of the satisfaction and atonement insisted on, not only does God freely forgive, but that in such a way of righteousness and goodness, as no creature is able to conceive or express the glory and excellency of it. And to speak of the poor having pardons of private men, upon particular offences against themselves, who are commanded so to do, and have no right nor authority to require or exact punishment, nor is any due upon the mere account of their own concernment, in comparison with the forgiveness of God, arises out of a deep ignorance of the whole matter under consideration.

Thirdly, they say it hence follows, 'That it is unworthy of God to pardon, but not to inflict punishment on the innocent, or require a satisfaction where there was nothing due.'

Answer: 1. What is worthy or unworthy of God, himself alone knows, and of men not any, but according to what he is pleased to declare and reveal; but, certainly, it is unworthy any person, pretending to the least interest in ingenuity or use of reason, to use such frivolous instances in any case of importance, which have not the least pretence of argument in them, but what arises from a gross misapprehension or misrepresentation of a doctrine designed to opposition. 2. To pardon sinners, is a thing becoming the goodness and grace of God; to do it by Christ, that which becomes them, and his holiness and righteousness also, Ephesians 1:6, 7; Romans 3:25. 3. The Lord Christ was personally innocent; but 'he who knew no sin was made sin for us,' 2 Corinthians 5:21. And as the mediator and surety of the covenant, he was to answer for the sins of them whom he undertook to save from the wrath to come, by giving himself a ransom for them, and making his soul an offering for their sin. 4. That nothing is due to the justice of God for sin, — that is, that sin does not in the justice of God deserve punishment, — is a good, comfortable doctrine for men that are resolved to continue in their sins whilst they live in this world. The Scripture tells us that Christ paid what he took not; that all our iniquities were caused to meet upon him; that he bare them in his own body on the tree; that his soul was made an offering for sin, and thereby made reconciliation or atonement for the sins of the people. If these persons be otherwise minded, we cannot help it.

Fourthly, it is added, that 'This doctrine does not only disadvantage the true virtue and real intent of Christ's life and death, but entirely deprives God of that praise which is owing to his greatest love and goodness.'

Answer: 1. I suppose that this is the first time that this doctrine fell under this imputation; nor could it possibly be liable unto this charge from any who did either understand it or the grounds on which it is commonly opposed. For there is no end of the life or death of Christ which the Socinians themselves admit of, but it is also allowed and asserted in the doctrine now called in question. Do they say, that he taught the truth, or revealed the whole mind and will of God concerning his worship and our obedience? We say the same. Do they say, that by his death he bare testimony unto and confirmed the truth which he had taught? It is also owned by us. Do they say, that in what he did and suffered he set us an example that we should labour after conformity unto? It is what we acknowledge and teach: only, we say that all these things belong principally to his prophetical office. But we, moreover, affirm and believe, that as a priest, or in the discharge of his sacerdotal office, he did, in his death and sufferings, offer himself a sacrifice to God, to make atonement for our sins, — which they deny; and that he died for us, or in our stead, that we might go free: without the faith and acknowledgment whereof no part of the gospel can be rightly understood. All the ends, then, which they themselves assign of the life and death of Christ are by us granted; and the principal one, which gives life and efficacy to the rest, is by them denied. Neither, — 2. Does it fall under any possible imagination, that the praise due unto God should be eclipsed hereby. The love and kindness of God towards us is in the Scripture fixed principally and fundamentally on his 'sending of his only begotten Son to die for us.' And, certainly, the greater the work was that he had to do, the greater ought our acknowledgment of his love and kindness to be. But it is said, —
"Fifthly, they say, 'That it represents the Son as more kind and compassionate than the Father; whereas if both be the same God, then either the Father is as loving as the Son, or the Son as angry as the Father.'

Answer: 1. The Scripture refers the love of the Father unto two heads:— (1.) The sending of his Son to die for us, John 3:16; Romans 5:8; 1 John 4:9-10. (2.) In choosing sinners unto a participation of the fruits of his love, Ephesians 1:3-6. The love of the Son is fixed signally on his actual giving himself to die for us, Galatians 2:20; Ephesians 5:25; Revelation 1:5. What balances these persons have got to weigh these loves in, and to conclude which is the greatest or most weighty, I know not. 2. Although only the actual discharge of his office be directly assigned to the love of Christ, yet his condescension in taking our nature upon him, — expressed by his mind, Philippians 2:5-8, and the readiness of his will, Psalm 40:8, — does eminently comprise love in it so. 3. The love of the Father in sending of the Son was an act of his will; which being a natural and essential property of God, it was so far the act of the Son also, as he is partaker of the same nature, though eminently, and in respect of order, it was peculiarly the act of the Father. 4. The anger of God against sin is an effect of his essential righteousness and holiness, which belong to him as God; which yet hinders not but that both Father, and Son, and Spirit, acted love towards sinners.

Sixthly, “It robs God of the gift of his Son for our redemption, which the Scriptures attribute to the unmerited love he had for the world, in affirming the Son purchased that redemption from the Father, by the gift of himself to God as our complete satisfaction.”

Answer: 1. It were endless to consider the improper and absurd expressions which are made use of in these exceptions, as here; the last words have no tolerable sense in them, according to any principles whatever. 2. If the Son’s purchasing redemption for us, procuring, obtaining it, do rob God of the gift of his Son for our redemption, the Holy Ghost must answer for it; for, having “obtained” for us, or procured, or purchased, “eternal redemption,” is the word used by himself, Hebrews 9:12; and to deny that he has laid down his life a “ransom” for us, and has “bought us with a price,” is openly to deny the gospel. 3. In a word, the great gift of God consisted in giving his Son to obtain redemption for us. 4. Herein he “offered himself unto God,” and “gave himself for us;” and if these persons are offended herewithal, what are we, that we should withstand God?

Seventhly, “Since Christ could not pay what was not his own, it follows, that in the payment of his own the case still remains equally grievous; since the debt is not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred only; and, by consequence, we are no better provided for salvation than before, owing that now to the Son which was once owing to the Father.”

Answer: The intention of this pretended consequence of our doctrine is that, upon a supposition of satisfaction made by Christ, there is no solid foundation remaining for the prescription of faith, repentance, and obedience, on the one hand; or of punishing them who refuse so to obey, believe, or repent, on the other. The reason of this inference insinuated seems to be this, — that sin being satisfied for, cannot be called again to an account. For the former part of the pretended consequence, — namely, that on this supposition there is no foundation left for the prescription of godliness, — I cannot discern any thing in the least looking towards the confirmation of it in the words of the objection laid down. But these things are quite otherwise; as is manifest unto them that read and obey the gospel. For, — 1. Christ’s satisfaction for sins acquits not the creature of that dependence on God, and duty which he owes to God, which (notwithstanding that) God may justly, and does prescribe unto him, suitable to his own nature, holiness, and will. The whole of our regard unto God does not lie in an acquitment from sin. It is, moreover, required of us, as a necessary and indispensable consequence of the relation wherein we stand unto him, that we live to him and obey him, whether sin be satisfied for or no. The manner and measure hereof are to be regulated by his prescriptions, which are suited to his own wisdom and our condition; and they are now referred to the heads mentioned, of faith, repentance, and new obedience. 2. The satisfaction made for sin being not made by the sinner himself, there must of necessity be a rule, order, and law-constitution, how the sinner may come to be interested in it, and made partaker of it. For the consequent of the freedom of one by the suffering of another is not natural or necessary, but must proceed and arise from a law-constitution, compact, and agreement. Now, the way constituted and appointed is that of faith, or believing, as explained in the Scripture. If men believe not, they are no less liable to the punishment due to their sins than if no satisfaction at all were made for sinners. And whereas it is added, “Forgetting that every one must appear before the judgement-seat of Christ, to receive according to the things done in the body, yea, and every one must give an account of himself to God;” closing all with this, “But many more are the gross absurdities and blasphemies that are the genuine fruits of this so confidently-believed doctrine of satisfaction:” I say it is, — 3. Certain that we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, to receive according to the things done in the body; and therefore, woe will be unto them at the great day who are not able to plead the atonement made for their sins by the blood of Christ, and an evidence of their interest therein by their faith and obedience, or the things done and wrought in them and by them whilst they were in the body here in this world. And this it would better become these persons to betake themselves unto the consideration of, than to exercise themselves unto an unparalleled confidence in reproaching those with absurdities and blasphemies who believe the Deity and satisfaction of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who died for us; which is the ground and bottom of all our expectation of a blessed life and immortality to come.

The removal of these objections against the truth, scattered of late up and down in the hands of all sorts of men, may suffice for our present purpose. If any amongst these men judge that they have an ability to manage the opposition against the

 truth as declared by us, with such pleas, arguments, and exceptions, as may pretend an interest in appearing reason, they shall, God assisting, be attended unto. With men given up to a spirit of railing or reviling, — though it be no small honour to be reproached by them who reject with scorn the eternal Deity of the Son of God, and the satisfactory atonement that he made for the sins of men, — no person of sobriety will contend. And I shall farther only desire the reader to take notice, that though these few sheets were written in a few hours, upon the desire and for the satisfaction of some private friends, and therefore contain merely an expression of present thoughts, without the least design or diversion of mind towards accuracy or ornament; yet the author is so far confident that the truth, and nothing else, is proposed and confirmed in them, that he fears not but that an opposition to what is here declared will be removed, and the truth reinforced in such a way and manner as may not be to its disadvantage."
