---
layout: post
title:  "No Mind Has Imagined"
date:   2025-04-23 13:01:53 +0800
categories: devotions
author: Ajay Daram
---

# No Mind Has Imagined!
**(Thomas Brooks, "A String of Pearls" 1657)**

Surely there is no believer but who finds that...
- sometimes *sin* interrupts his joy,
- and sometimes *Satan* disturbs his joy,
- and sometimes *afflictions* eclipse his joy.
- Sometimes the *cares* of the world, and sometimes the *snares* of the world, and sometimes the *fears* of the world—mar his joy.

Here on earth, our joy is **mixed** with sorrow; our rejoicing with trembling. The most godly have...
- sorrow, mixed with their joy;
- water, mixed with their wine;
- vinegar, mixed with their oil
- pain, mixed with their ease;
- winter, mixed with their summer, etc.

But in Heaven, they shall have...
- joy, without sorrow;
- light, without darkness;
- sweetness, without bitterness;
- summer, without winter;
- health, without sickness;
- honor, without disgrace;
- glory, without shame, and
- life without death.

"In His presence is fullness of joy, and at His right hand are pleasures forevermore." Psalm 16:11

Mark:
- for *quality*—there are pleasures;
- for *quantity*—fullness;
- for *dignity*—at God's right hand;
- for *duration*—forevermore.

And millions of years multiplied by millions, do not make up one minute of this eternity of joy which the saints shall have in Heaven!

In Heaven there shall be...
- no *sin* to take away your joy,
- nor any *devil* to take away your joy,
- nor any *man* to take away your joy!

As they shall have in Heaven *pure* joy, so they shall have in Heaven *fullness* of joy. Here on earth all joy is at an ebb—but in Heaven is the *flood* of joy! Here shall be joy above joy, joy surmounting all joy. Here shall be such *great* joys—as no geometrician can measure; so *many* joys—as no arithmetician can number; and such *wonderful* joys—as no rhetorician can utter, had he the tongue of men and angels!

Sometimes great crosses, sometimes hard losses, and sometimes unexpected changes—turn a Christian's harping into mourning.

Here shall be joy within you, and joy without you, and joy above you, and joy beneath you, and joy about you. Joy shall spread itself over all the members of your bodies, and over all the faculties of your souls.

In Heaven,
- your *knowledge* shall be full,
- your *love* full,
- your *visions of God* full,
- your *communion with God* full,
- your *enjoyment* of God full,
- and your *conformity* to God full;

and from thence will arise fullness of joy.

If all the earth were **paper**, and all the plants of the earth were **pens**, and all the sea were **ink**, and if every man, woman, and child, had the pen of a ready writer—yet they would not able to express the thousandth part of those joys which saints shall have in Heaven!

All the *joy* which we have here in this world is but pensiveness—compared to that joy which we shall have in Heaven.

All the *pleasure* which we have here in this world is but heaviness—compared to that joy which we shall have in Heaven.

All *sweetness* which we have here in this world is but bitterness—compared to that joy which we shall have in Heaven.

"No eye has seen, no ear has heard, and **no mind has imagined** what God has prepared for those who love Him." 1 Corinthians 2:9